A productive, systematic framework for 
the representation of visual structure 
Shimon Edelman 
232 Uris Hall, Dept. of Psychology 
Cornell University 
Ithaca, NY 14853-7601 
se37cornell. edu 
Nathan Intrator 
Institute for Brain and Neural Systems 
Box 1843, Brown University 
Providence, RI 02912 
Nathan_lrntratorbrown. edu 
Abstract 
We describe a unified framework for the understanding of struc- 
ture representation in primate vision. A model derived from this 
framework is shown to be effectively systematic in that it has the 
ability to interpret and associate together objects that are related 
through a rearrangement of common "middle-scale" parts, repre- 
sented as image fragments. The model addresses the same concerns 
as previous work on compositional representation through the use 
of what-l-where receptive fields and attentional gain modulation. It 
does not require prior exposure to the individual parts, and avoids 
the need for abstract symbolic binding. 
I The problem of structure representation 
The focus of theoretical discussion in visual object processing has recently started to 
shift from problems of recognition and categorization to the representation of object 
structure. Although view- or appearance-based solutions for these problems proved 
effective on a variety of object classes [1], the "holistic" nature of this approach 
- the lack of explicit representation of relational structure - limits its appeal as a 
general framework for visual representation [2]. 
The main challenges in the processing of structure are productivity and system- 
aticity, two traits commonly attributed to human cognition. A visual system is 
productive if it is open-ended, that is, if it can deal effectively with a potentially 
infinite set of objects. A visual representation is systematic if a well-defined change 
in the spatial configuration of the object (e.g., swapping top and bottom parts) 
causes a principled change in the representation (e.g., the interchange of the rep- 
resentations of top and bottom parts [3, 2]). A solution commonly offered to the 
twin problems of productivity and systematicity is compositional representation, in 
which symbols standing for generic parts drawn from a small repertoire are bound 
together by categorical symbolically coded relations [4]. 
2 The Chorus of Fragments 
In visual representation, the need for symbolic binding may be alleviated by us- 
ing location in the visual field in lieu of the abstract frame that encodes object 
structure. Intuitively, the constituents of the object are then bound to each other 
by virtue of residing in their proper places in the visual field; this can be thought 
of as a pegboard, whose spatial structure supports the arrangement of parts sus- 
pended from its pegs. This scheme exhibits shallow compositionality, which can 
be enhanced by allowing the "pegboard" mechanism to operate at different spatial 
scales, yielding effective systematicity across levels of resolution. Coarse coding the 
constituents (e.g., representing each object fragment in terms of its similarities to 
some basis shapes) will render the scheme productive. We call this approach to the 
representation of structure the Chorus of Fragments (CoF; [5]). 
2.1 Neurobiological building blocks 
What+ Where cells. The representation of spatially anchored object fragments pos- 
tulated by the CoF model can be supported by what+where neurons, each tuned 
both to a certain shape class and to a certain range of locations in the visual field. 
Such cells have been found in the monkey in areas V4 and posterior IT [6], and in 
the prefrontal cortex [7]. 
Attentional gain fields. To decouple the representation of object structure from its 
location in the visual field, one needs a version of the what+where mechanism in 
which the response of the cell depends not merely on the location of the stimulus 
with respect to fixation (as in classical receptive fields), but also on its location 
with respect to the focus of attention. Indeed, modulatory effects of object-centered 
attention on classical RF structure (gain fields) have been found in area V4 [8]. 
2.2 Implemented model 
Our implementation of the CoF model involves what+where cells with attention- 
modulated gain fields, and is aimed at productive and systematic treatment of 
composite shapes in object-centered coordinates. It operates directly on gray-level 
images, pre-processed by a model of the primary visual cortex [9], with complex- 
cell responses modified to use the MAX operation suggested in [10]. In the model, 
one what+where unit is assigned to the top and one to the bottom fragment of the 
visual field, each extracted by an appropriately configured Gaussian gain profile 
(Figure 2, left). The units are trained (1) to discriminate among five objects, 
(2) to tolerate translation within the hemifield, and (3) to provide an estimate of 
the reliability of its output, through an autoassociation mechanism attempting to 
reconstruct the stimulus image [11, 12]. Within each hemifield, the five outputs 
of a unit can provide a coarse coding of novel objects belonging to the familiar 
category, in a manner useful for translation-tolerant recognition [13]. The reliability 
estimate carries information about category, allowing outputs for objects from other 
categories to be squelched. Most importantly, due to the spatial localization of the 
unit's receptive field, the system can distinguish between different configurations of 
the same shapes, while noting the fragment-wise similarities. 
We assume that during learning the system performs multiple fixations of the target 
object, effectively providing the what+where units with a basis for spanning the 
where 2 
/what 
"1 above center" 
....... 
I [/ 
J 
ß , "1 below center" 
where I 
"something / 
below center" 
Figure 1: Left: the CoF model conceptualized as a "computation cube" trained to 
distinguish among three fragments (1, 6, 9), each possibly appearing at two loca- 
tions (above or below the center of attention). A parallel may be drawn between 
the computation cube and a cortical hypercolumn; in the inferotemporal cortex, 
cells selective for specific shapes may be arranged in columns, with the dimension 
perpendicular to the cortical surface encoding different variants of the same shape 
[14]. It is not known whether the attention-centered location of the shape, which 
affects the responses of V4 cells [8], is mapped in an orderly fashion onto some phys- 
ical dimension(s) of the cortex. Right: the estimation of the marginal probabilities 
of shapes, which can be used to decide whether to allocate a unit coding for their 
composition, can be carried out simply by summing the activities of units along the 
different dimensions of the computation cube. 
space of stimulus translations. It is up to the model, however, to figure out that the 
objects may be composed of recurring fragments, and to self-organize in a manner 
that would allow it to deal with novel configurations of those fragments. This 
problem, which arises both at the level of fragments and of their constituent features, 
can be addressed within the Minimum Description Length (MDL) framework. 
Specifically, we propose to construct receptive fields (RFs) for composite objects so 
as to capture the deviation from independence between the probability distributions 
of the responses of RFs tuned to their fragments. This implies a savings in the 
description length of the composite object. Suppose, for example, that rfl is the 
response of a unit tuned roughly to the top half of the character 6 and r f2 - the 
response of a unit tuned to its bottom half. The construction of a more complex 
RF combining the responses of these two units will be justified when 
P(rfl,rf2)  P(rfl)P(rf2) 
(1) 
or, more practically, when some measure of deviation from independence between 
P(rfl) and P(rf2) is large (the simplest such measure would be the covariance, 
namely, the second moment of the joint distribution but we believe that higher 
moments may also be required, as suggested by the extensive work on measuring 
deviation from Gaussian distributions). 
By this criterion, a composite RF will be constructed that recognizes the two "parts" 
of the character 6 when they are appropriately located: the probability on the LHS 
of eq. 1 in that case would be proportional to 1/10, while the probability of the RHS 
would be proportional to 1/100 (assuming that all characters are equiprobable, and 
that their fragments never appear in isolation). At the same time, a composite RF 
tuned, say, to 6 above 3 (see section 3) will not be allocated, because the probability 
of such a complex feature as measured by either the RHS or the LHS of eq. 1 is 
proportional to 1/100. We note that this feature analysis can be performed on 
the marginal probabilities of the corresponding fragments, which are by definition 
less sensitive to image parameters such as the exact location or scale, and can be 
based on a family of features (cf. Figure 1). A discussion of this approach and 
of its relationship to the reconstruction constraint we impose when training the 
fragment-tuned modules is beyond the scope of this paper. 
A parallel can be drawn between the MDL framework just outlined and the findings 
concerning what+where cells and gain fields in the shape processing pathway in the 
monkey cortex. Under the interpretation we propose, the features at all levels 
of the hierarchy are coarsely coded, and each feature is associated with a rough 
location in the visual field, so that composite features necessarily represent more 
complex spatial structure than their constituents, without separately implemented 
binding, and without a combinatorial proliferation of features. The computational 
experiments described below concentrate on these novel characteristics of our model, 
rather than on the standard MDL machinery. 
Reconstruction error Classification 
(modulatory signal) (output signal) 
above center 
gain 
field 
Figure 2: The CoF model, trained on five composite objects (1 over 6, 2 over 7, etc.). 
Left: the model consists of two what+where units, responsible for the bottom and 
the top fragments of the stimulus, respectively. Gain fields (boxes labeled below 
center and above center) steer each input fragment to the appropriate unit. The 
learning mechanism (R/C, for Reconstruction/Classification) was implemented as a 
radial basis function network. The reconstruction error (A) modulates the classifi- 
cation outputs. Right: training the model, viewed as a computation cube. Multiple 
fixations of the stimulus (of which three are illustrated), along with Gaussian win- 
dows selecting stimulus fragments, allow the system to learn what+where responses. 
A cell would only be allocated to a given fragment if it recurs in the company of a 
variety of other fragments, as warranted by the ratio between their joint probability 
and the product of the corresponding marginal probabilities (cf. eq. i and Figure 1, 
right; this criterion has not yet been incorporated into the CoF training scheme). 
3 Computational experiments 
We conducted three experiments that examined the properties of the structured 
representations emerging from the CoF model. The first experiment (reported else- 
where [13]), involved animal-like shapes and aimed at demonstrating basic produc- 
tivity and systematicity. We found that the CoF model is capable of systematically 
interpreting composite objects to which it was not previously exposed (for example, 
a half-goat and half-lion chimera is represented as such, by an ensemble of units 
trained to discriminate between three altogether different animals). 
In the second experiment, a version of the CoF model (Figure 2) was charged with 
learning to reuse fragments of the members of the training set -- five bipartite 
objects composed of shapes of numerals from i through 0 -- in interpreting novel 
compositions of the same fragments. The gain field mechanism built into the CoF 
model allowed it to respond largely systematically to the learned fragments even 
when these were shown in novel locations, both absolute, and relative (Figure 3, 
left). 
The third experiment addressed a basic prediction of the CoF model, stemming 
from its reliance on whatq-where mechanisms: the interaction between effects of 
shape and location in object representation. Such interaction had been found in a 
psychophysical study [15], in which the task was 4-alternative forced-choice classi- 
fication of two-part stimuli consisting of simple geometric shapes (cube, cylinder, 
sphere, cone). The composite stimuli were defined by two variables, shape and loca- 
tion, each of which could be same, neutral, or different in the prime and the target 
(yielding 9 conditions altogether). Response times of human subjects revealed ef- 
fects of shape and location (whatq-where), but not of shape alone; the pattern of 
priming across the nine conditions was replicated by the CoF model (correlation 
between model and human data r - 0.85), using the same stimuli as in the psy- 
chophysical experiment. 
4 Discussion 
Because CoF relies on retinotopy rather than on abstract binding, its representation 
of spatial structure is location-specific; so is the treatment of structure by the human 
visual system, as indicated by a number of findings. For example, priming in a 
subliminal perception task was found to be confined to a quadrant of the visual field 
[16]. The notion that the representation of an object may be tied to a particular 
location in the visual field where it is first observed is compatible with the concept of 
object file, a hypothetical record created by the visual system for every encountered 
object, which persists as long as the object is observed. Moreover, location (as it 
figures in the CoF model) should be interpreted relative to the focus of attention, 
rather than retinotopically [17]. 
The idea that global relationships (hence, large-scale structure) have precedence 
over local ones [18], which is central to our approach, has withstood extensive testing 
in the past two decades. Even with the perceptual salience of the global and local 
structure equated, subjects are able to process the relations among elements before 
the elements themselves are identified [19]. More generally, humans are limited 
in their ability to represent spatial structure, in that the representation of spatial 
relations requires spatial attention. For example, visual search is difficult when 
above 
below 
aove 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 
below 
i 2 6 7 8 9 0 
3 4 5 
9- 
8- 
7- 
6- 
5- 
4- 
3- 
2- 
1 
me an 
correct 
rate 
/! \ 
0.1 0.05 0.01 0.005 
mean 
 entropy 
per unit 
2.00 
1.75 
1.50 
1.25 
1.00 
0.75 
0.50 
0.25 
Figure 3: Left: the response of the CoF model to a novel composite object, 6 (which 
only appeared in the bottom position in the training set) over 3 (which was only seen 
in the top position). The interpretations offered by the model were correct in 94 out 
of the 100 possible test cases (10 digits on top x 10 digits on the bottom) in this 
experiment. Note: in the test scenario, each unit (above and below) must be fed 
each of the two input fragments (above and below), hence the 20 bars in the plots 
of the model's output. Right: the non-monotonic dependence of the mean entropy 
per output unit (ordinate axis on the right; dashed line) on the spread constant cr 
of the radial basis functions (abscissa) indicates that entropy alone should not be 
used as a training criterion in object representation systems. 
targets differ from distractors only in the spatial relation between their elements, 
as if "... attention is required to bind features ..." [20]. 
The CoF model offers a unified framework, rooted in the MDL principle, for the 
understanding of these behavioral findings and of the functional significance of 
what+where receptive fields and attentional gain modulation. It extends the previ- 
ous use of gain fields in the modeling of translation invariance [21] and of object- 
centered hemi-neglect [22], and highlights a parallel between what+where cells and 
probabilistic approaches to structure representation in computational vision (e.g., 
[23]). The representational framework we described is both productive and effec- 
tively systematic. Specifically, it has the ability, as a matter of principle, to recog- 
nize as such objects that are related through a rearrangement of mesoscopic parts, 
without being taught those parts individually, and without the need for abstract 
symbolic binding. 
References 
[1] S. Edelman. Computational theories of object recognition. Trends in Cognitive Sci- 
ence, 1:296-304, 1997. 
[2] 
J. E. Hummel. Where view-based theories of human object recognition break down: 
the role of structure in human shape perception. In E. Dietrich and A. Markman, eds., 
Cognitive Dynamics: conceptual change in humans and machines, ch. 7. Erlbaum, 
Hillsdale, N J, 2000. 
[3] R. F. Hadley. Cognition, systematicity, and nomic necessity. Mind and Language, 
12:137-153, 1997. 
[4] 
E. Bienenstock, S. Geman, and D. Potter. Compositionality, MDL priors, and object 
recognition. In M. C. Mozer, M. I. Jordan, and T. Petsche, editors, NIPS 9. MIT 
Press, 1997. 
[5] S. Edelman. Representation and recognition in vision. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 
1999. 
[6] 
[7] 
Is] 
[9] 
[10] 
[11] 
[12] 
[13] 
[14] 
[15] 
[16] 
[17] 
[18] 
[19] 
[2o] 
[21] 
[22] 
[23] 
E. Kobatake and K. Tanaka. Neuronal selectivities to complex object features in the 
ventral visual pathway of the macaque cerebral cortex. J. Neurophysiol., 71:856-867, 
1994. 
S.C. Rao, G. Rainer, and E. K. Miller. Integration of what and where in the primate 
prefrontal cortex. Science, 276:821-824, 1997. 
C. E. Connor, D.C. Preddie, J. L. Gallant, and D.C. Van Essen. Spatial attention 
effects in macaque area V4. J. of Neuroscience, 17:3201-3214, 1997. 
D. J. Heeger, E. P. Simoncelli, and J. Anthony Movshon. Computational models of 
cortical visual processing. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 93:623-627, 1996. 
M. Riesenhuber and T. Poggio. Hierarchical models of object recognition in cortex. 
Nature Neuroscience, 2:1019-1025, 1999. 
D. Pomerleau. Input reconstruction reliability estimation. In C. L. Giles, S. J. Hanson, 
and J. D. Cowan, editors, NIPS 5, pages 279-286. Morgan Kaufmann, 1993. 
I. Stainvas, N. Intrator, and A. Moshaiov. Improving recognition via reconstruction, 
2000. preprint. 
S. Edelman and N. Intrator. (Coarse Coding of Shape l*ragments) + (Retinotopy)  
Representation of Structure. Spatial Vision, 13:255-264, 2000. 
I. l*ujita, K. Tanaka, M. Ito, and K. Cheng. Columns for visual features of objects in 
monkey inferotemporal cortex. Nature, 360:343-346, 1992. 
S. Edelman and F. N. Newell. On the representation of object structure in human 
vision: evidence from differential priming of shape and location. CSRP 500, University 
of Sussex, 1998. 
M. Bar and I. Biederman. Subliminal visual priming. Psychological Science, 9(6):464- 
469, 1998. 
A. Treisman. Perceiving and re-perceiving objects. American Psychologist, 47:862- 
875, 1992. 
D. Navon. Forest before trees: The precedence of global features in visual perception. 
Cognitive Psychology, 9:353-383, 1977. 
B.C. Love, J. N. Rouder, and E. J. Wisniewski. A structural account of global and 
local processing. Cognitive Psychology, 38:291-316, 1999. 
A.M. Treisman and N. G. Kanwisher. Perceiving visually presented objects: recogni- 
tion, awareness, and modularity. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 8:218-226, 1998. 
E. Salinas and L. F. Abbott. Invariant visual responses from attentional gain fields. 
J. of Neurophysiology, 77:3267-3272, 1997. 
S. Deneve and A. Pouget. Neural basis of object-centered representations. In M. I. 
Jordan, M. J. Kearns, and S. A. Solla, editors, NIPS 11, Cambridge, MA, 1998. MIT 
Press. 
M. C. Burl, M. Weber, and P. Perohs. A probabilistic approach to object recogni- 
tion using local photometry and global geometry. In Proc. 4 *h Europ. Conf. Corn- 
put. Vision, H. Burkhardt and B. Neumann (Eds.), LNCS-Series Vol. 1406-1407, 
Springer-Verlag, pages 628-641, June 1998. 
