Probabilistic Semantic Video Indexing 
Milind R. Naphade, Igor Kozintsev and Thomas Huang 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
( milind, igor, huang) ifp. uiuc. 
Abstract 
We propose a novel probabilistic framework for semantic video in- 
dexing. We define probabilistic multimedia objects (multijects) 
to map low-level media features to high-level semantic labels. A 
graphical network of such multijects (multinet) captures scene con- 
text by discovering intra-frame as well as inter-frame dependency 
relations between the concepts. The main contribution is a novel 
application of a factor graph framework to model this network. 
We model relations between semantic concepts in terms of their 
co-occurrence as well as the temporal dependencies between these 
concepts within video shots. Using the sum-product algorithm [1] 
for approximate or exact inference in these factor graph multinets, 
we attempt to correct errors made during isolated concept detec- 
tion by forcing high-level constraints. This results in a significant 
improvement in the overall detection performance. 
1 Introduction 
Research in video retrieval has traditionally focussed on the paradigm of query-by- 
example (QBE) using low-level features [2]. Query by keywords/key-phrases (QBK) 
(preferably semantic) instead of examples has motivated recent research in semantic 
video indexing. For this, we need models which capture the feature representation 
corresponding to these keywords. A QBK system can support semantic retrieval for 
a small set of keywords and also act as the first step in QBE systems to narrow down 
the search. The difficulty lies in the gap between low-level media features and high- 
level semantics. Recent attempts to address this include detection of audio-visual 
events like explosion [3] and semantic visual templates [4]. 
We propose a statistical pattern recognition approach for training probabilistic mul- 
timedia objects (multijects) which map the high level concepts to low-level audio- 
visual features. We also propose a probabilistic factor graph framework, which mod- 
els the interaction between concepts within each video frame as well as across the 
video flames within each video shot. Factor graphs provide an elegant framework to 
represent the stochastic relationship between concepts, while the sum-product algo- 
rithm provides an efficient tool to perform learning and inference in factor graphs. 
Using exact as well as approximate inference (through loopy probability propaga- 
tion) we show that there is significant improvement in the detection performance. 
2 Proposed Framework 
To support retrieval based on high-level queries like 'Explosion on a beach', we need 
models for the event explosion and site beach. User queries might similarly involve 
sky, helicopter, car-chase etc. Detection of some of these concepts may be possible, 
while some others may not be directly observable. To support such queries, we 
proposed a probabilistic multimedia object (multiject) [3] as shown in Figure 1 (a), 
which has a semantic label and which summarizes a time sequence of features from 
multiple media. A Multiject can belong to any of the three categories: objects (car, 
man, helicopter), sites (outdoor, beach), or events (explosion, man-walking). 
Intuitively it is clear that the presence of certain multijeers suggests a high possibil- 
ity of detecting certain other multijeers. Similarly some multijeers are less likely to 
occur in the presence of others. The detection of sky and water boosts the chances 
of detecting a beach, and reduces the chances of detecting Indoor. It might also be 
possible to detect some concepts and infer more complex concepts based on their 
relation with the detected ones. Detection of human speech in the audio stream and 
a face in the video stream may lead to the inference of humat, talking. To integrate 
all the multijeers and model their interaction, we propose the network of multijeers 
which we term as multinet. A conceptual figure of a multinet is shown in Figure 
1 (b) with positive (negative) signs indicating positive (negative) interaction. In 
P (concept=Outdoor I fi atures, other mutlijects) = 0.7 
video audio 
features features 
 Rocket launch 
Skydxvxng + 
Figure 1: (a) A probabilistic multimedia object. (b) A conceptual multinet. 
Section 5 we present a factor graph multinet implementation. 
3 Video segmentation and Feature Extraction 
We have digitized movies of different genres to create a large database of a few 
hours of video data. The video clips are segmented into shots using the algorithm 
in [5]. We then perform spario-temporal segmentation [2] within each shot to ob- 
tain and track regions homogeneous in color and motion separated by strong edges. 
Large dominant regions are labeled manually. Each region is then processed to 
extract features characterizing the color (3-channel histogram [3]), texture (statis- 
tical properties of the Gray-level Co-occurrence matrices at 4 different orientations 
[6]), structure (edge direction histogram [7]), motion (affine motion parameters) 
and shape (moment invariants [8]). Details about the extracted features can be 
found in [9]. For sites we use color, texture and structural features (84 elements) 
and for objects and events we use all features (98 elements) . Audio features are 
extracted as in [10]. For training our multijeer and multinet models we use 1800 
flames from different video shots and for testing our framework we use 9400 flames. 
Since consecutive images within a shot are correlated, the video data is subsampled 
to create the training and testing without redundancy. 
4 Modeling semantic concepts using Multijects 
We use an identical approach to model concepts in video and audio (independently 
and jointly). The following site multijeers are used in our experiments: sky, water, 
forest, rocks and snow. Audio-only multijects (human-speech, music) can be found 
in [10] and audio-visual multijeers (explosion) in [3]. Detection of multijeers is 
performed on every segmented region 2 within each video frame. Let the feature 
vector for the region j be ffj. We model the semantic concept as a binary random 
variable and define the two hypotheses H0 and H as 
H0: ffj .- P0(-j) H: ffj .- P(.j) (1) 
where P0(-j) and P(.j) denote the class conditional probability density func- 
tions conditioned on the null hypothesis (concept absent) and the true hypothesis 
(concept present). P0(ffj) and P(ffj) are modeled using a mixture of Gaussian 
components for the site multijeers 3. For objects and events (in video and audio), 
hidden Markov models replace the Gaussian mixture models and feature vectors for 
all the flames within a shot constitute to the time series modeled. The detection 
performance for the five site multijeers on the test-set is given in Table 1. 
multijeer Rocks Sky Snow Water Forest 
Detection (%) 77 81.8 81.5 79.4 85.1 
False Alarm (%) 24.1 11.9 12.9 15.6 14.9 
Table 1: Maximum likelihood binary classification performance for site multijeers. 
4.1 Frame level semantic features 
Since multijeers are used as semantic feature detectors at a regional level, it is easy 
to define multijeer-based semantic features at the frame level by integrating the 
region-level classification. We check each region for each concept individually and 
obtain probabilities of each concept being present or absent in the region. Imperfect 
segmentation does not hurt us too much since these soft decisions are modified in 
the multinet based on high-level constraints. Defining a binary random variable 
(Rij = 1/0 if concept present/absent) and assuming uniform priors on the presence 
or absence of a concept in any region we can use Bayes' rule to obtain: 
P(tij: ll.zj) : P(.JjlRij -- 1)/(P(.JjlRi j -- 1) + P(.JjlRij -- 0)) (2) 
Defining binary random variables Fi, i c {1, N} (N is the number of concepts) to 
take on value 1 if concept i is present in the frame and value 0 otherwise, we use the 
Automatic feature selection is not addressed here. 
2We thank Prof. Chang and D. Zhong for the algorithm [2]. 
3P0(3{j) used 5 gaussian components, while P(3{j) used 10. The number of mixing 
components can be fixed experimentally and could be different for optimal performance. 
In general models for H0 are represented better with more components than those for H 
OR function to combine soft decisions for each concept from all regions to obtain 
Fi. Let ' -- {ff,..., M} (M is the number of regions in a frame), then 
j----M 
P(ri = 0IX) = 1-[ P(ij = 0l:j) and P(ri = IX) = - P(ri = 0l) (3) 
j----1 
The multinet as a factor graph 
To model the interaction between multijeers in a multinet, we propose to use a 
factor graph [1] flamework. Factor graphs subsume graphical models like Bayesian 
nets and Markov random fields and have been successfully applied in the area of 
channel error correction coding [1] and specifically, iterative decoding. Let x = 
{x, x2,..., xn} be a vector of variables. A factor graph visualizes the factorization 
of a global function f(x). Let f(x) factor as 
f(x) -- 1-[ fi(x(i)) (4) 
i----1 
where x © is the set of variables of the function fi. A factor graph for f is defined as 
the hipattire graph with two vertex classes Vf and Vv of sizes m and n respectively 
such that the ith node in Vf is connected to the jth node in Vv iff fi is a function 
of xj. Figure 2 (a) shows a simple factor graph representation of f(x,y,z) -- 
f(x,y)f2(y,z) witix function nodes f, f2 and variable nodes x,y,z. 
Many signal processing and learning problems are formulated as optimizing a global 
function f (x) marginalized for a subset of its arguments. The algorithm which al- 
lows us to perform this efficiently, though in most cases only approximately, is called 
the sum-product algorithm. The sum-product algorithm works by computing 
messages at the nodes using a simple rule and then passing the messages between 
nodes according to a reasonable schedule. A message fi'om a function node to a 
variable node is the product of all messages incoming to the function node with the 
function itself, marginalized for the variable associated with the variable node. A 
message fi'om a variable node to a function node is simply the product of all mes- 
sages incoming to the variable node fi'om other functions connected to it. Pearl's 
probability propagation working on a Bayesian net is equivalent to the sum-product 
algorithm applied to the corresponding factor graph. If the factor graph is a tree, 
exact inference is possible using a single set of forward and backward passage of 
messages. For all other cases inference is approximate and the message passing is 
iterative [1] leading to loopy probability propagation. This has a direct bearing on 
our problem because relations between semantic concepts are complicated and in 
general contain numerous cycles (e.g., see Figure 1 (b)). 
5.1 Relating semantic concepts in a factor graph 
We now describe a frame-level factor graph to model the probabilistic relations 
between various flame-level semantic features Fi obtained using Equation 3. To 
capture the co-occurrence relationship between the five semantic concepts at the 
flame-level, we define a function node which is connected to the five variable nodes 
representing the concepts as shown in Figure 2 (b). This function node represents 
P(F, F, F3, .., Fv). The function nodes below the five variable nodes denote the 
messages passed by the OR function of Equation 3 (P(Fi -- 1), P(Fi -- 0)). These 
are then propagated to the function node. At the function node the messages are 
multiplied by the function which is estimated from the co-occurrence of the concepts 
in the training set. The function node then sends back messages summarized for 
each variable. This modifies the soft decisions at the variable nodes according to 
the high-level relationship between the five concepts. In general, the distribution 
f(x,y,z)=fl(x,y)*f2(y,z ) Joint density function of 5 semantic concepts Factored joint density function of 5 semantic concepts 
f f2 
x y z Fusion at frame level using OR function Fusion at frame level using OR function 
(a) (b) (c) 
Figure 2: (a) An example of a simple factor graph (b)A multinet: Accounting for 
concept dependencies using a single function (b) Another multinet' Replacing the 
function in (b) by a product of 10 local functions. 
at the function node in Figure 2 (b) is exponential in the number of concepts 
(N) and the computational cost may increase quickly. To alleviate this we can 
enforce a factorization of the function in Figure 2 (b) as a product of a set of 
local functions where each local function accounts for co-occurrence of two variables 
only. This modification to the graph in Figure 2 (b) is shown in Figure 2 (c). 
Each function in Figure 2 (c) represents the joint probability mass of those two 
variables that are its arguments (and there are C2 N such functions) thus reducing 
the complexity. The factor graph is no longer a tree and exact inference becomes 
hard as the number of loops grows. We then apply iterative techniques based on 
the sum-product algorithm to overcome this. We can also incorporate temporal 
A dynamic multinet with unfactored global 
distribution for each frame 
Multinet Multinet 
state at 
state at frame t 
frame t-I 
A dynamic multinet with factored global 
distribution for each frame 
Multinet 
Multinet ' state at 
state at  frame t 
frame t- 1 
;, 
Accounting for temporal dependency using a Markov chain 
Accounting for temporal dependency using a Markov chain 
(a) (b) 
Figure 3: (a) Replicating the multinet in Figure 2 (b) for each frame in a shot and 
introducing temporal dependencies between the value of each concept in consecutive 
frames. (b) Iepeating this for Figure 2 (c). 
dependencies. This can be done by replicating the slice of factor graph in Figure 
2 (b) or (c) as many times as the number of frames within a single video shot and 
by introducing a first order Markov chain for each concept. Figures 3 (a) and (b) 
show two consecutive time slices and extend the models in Figures 2 (b) and (c) 
respectively. The horizontal links in Figures 3 (a), (b) connect the variable node 
for each concept in a time slice to the corresponding variable node in the next time 
slice through a function modeling the transition probability. This framework now 
becomes a dynamic probabilistic network. For inference, messages are iteratively 
passed locally within each slice. This is followed by message passing across the 
time slices in the forward direction and then in the backward direction. Accounting 
for temporal dependencies thus leads to temporal smoothing of the soft decisions 
within each shot. 
6 Results 
We compare detection performance of the multijeers with and without accounting 
for the concept dependencies and temporal dependencies. The reference system 
performs multijeer detection by thresholding soft-decisions (i.e., P(Fi]2d)) at the 
frame-level. The proposed schemes are then evaluated by thresholding the soft de- 
cisions obtained after message passing using the structures in Figures 2 (b), (c) 
(conceptual dependencies) and Figures 3 (a), (b) (conceptual and temporal depen- 
dencies). We use receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curves which show a plot 
of the probability of detection plotted against the probability of false alarms for 
different values of a parameter (the threshold in our case). 
Figure 4 shows the ROC curves for the overall performance over the test-set across 
all the five multijects. The three curves in Figure 4 (a) correspond to the perfor- 
mance using isolated flame-level classification, the factor graph in Figure 2 (b) and 
the factor graph in Figure 2 (c) with ten iterations of loopy propagation. The curves 
in Figure 4 (b) correspond to isolated detection followed by temporal smoothing, 
the dynamic multinet in Figure 3 (a) and the one in Figure 3 (b) respectively. From 
o 
o 
ROC curve for Overall Pedormance 
Reference system 
Multinet (unfactored distribution) 
[, Multiset (factored distribution, 10 ,trations) 
011 012 013 014 05 06 07 08 09 
Probability of Fal Alarms 
ROC rve for Overall Performance with smoothing 
Reference system with smoothing 
Multinet (unfactored distribution) with smoothing 
Multinet (factored distribution, 10 iterations) with smoothing 
02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 
Probability of False Alarms 
(a) 
Figure 4: ROC curves for overall performance using isolated detection and two 
factor graph representations. (a) With static multinets (b) With dynamic multinets. 
Figure 4 we observe that there is significant improvement in detection performance 
by using the multinet to model the dependencies between concepts than without 
using it. This improvement is especially stark for low Pf where detection rate im- 
proves by more than 22 % for a threshold corresponding to Pf -- 0.1. Interestingly, 
detection based on the factorized functions (Figure 2 (c)) performs better than 
the the one based on the unfactorized function. This suggests that the factorized 
function is a better representative and can be estimated more reliably due to fewer 
parameters being involved. Also by using models in Figure 3, which account for 
temporal dependencies across video flames and by performing smoothing using the 
forward backward algorithm, we see further improvement in detection performance 
in Figure 4 (b). The detection rate corresponding to Pf -- 0.1 is 68 % for the 
static multinet (Figure 2 (c)) and 72 % for its dynamic counterpart (Figure 3 (b)). 
Comparison of ROC curves with and without temporal smoothing (not shown here 
due to lack of space) reveal that temporal smoothing results in better detection 
irrespective of the threshold or configuration. 
7 Conclusions and Future Research 
We propose a probabilistic framework for detecting semantic concepts using multi- 
jeers and multinets. We present implementations of static and dynamic multinets 
using factor graphs. We show that there is significant improvement in detection per- 
formance by accounting for the interaction between semantic concepts and temporal 
dependency amongst the concepts. The multinet architecture imposes no restric- 
tions on the classifiers used in the multijeers and we can improve performance by 
using better multijeer models. Our framework can be easily expanded to integrate 
multiple modalities if they have not been integrated in the multijeers to account for 
the loose coupling between audio and visual streams in movies. It can also support 
inference of concepts that are observed not through media features but through 
their relation to those concepts which are observed in media features. 
References 
[1] 
[2] 
[3] 
[4] 
[5] 
F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, "Factor graphs and the sum-product 
algorithm," submitted to IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, July 1998. 
D. Zhong and S. F. Chang, "Spatio-temporal video search using the object-based 
video representation," in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Image 
Processing, vol. 2, Santa Barbara, CA, Oct. 1997, pp. 21 24. 
M. Naphade, T. Kristjansson, B. Prey, and T. S. Huang, "Probabilistic multimedia 
objects (multijeers): A novel approach to indexing and retrieval in multimedia sys- 
tems," in Proceedings of the fifth IEEE International Conference on Image Processing, 
vol. 3, Chicago, IL, Oct 1998, pp. 536 540. 
S. F. Chang, W. Chen, and H. Sundaram, "Semantic visual templates - linking fea- 
tures to semantics," in Proceedings of the fifth IEEE International Conference on 
Image Processing, vol. 3, Chicago, IL, Oct 1998, pp. 531 535. 
M. Naphade, R. Mehrotra, A.M. Ferman, J. Warnick, T. S. Huang, and A.M. 
Tekalp, "A high performance shot boundary detection algorithm using multiple cues," 
in Proceedings of the fifth IEEE International Conference on Image Processing, vol. 2, 
Chicago, IL, Oct 1998, pp. 884 887. 
[6] R. Jain, R. Kasturi, and B. Schunck, Machine Vision. MIT Press and McGraw-Hill, 
1995. 
[7] 
[8] 
[9] 
[lO] 
A. K. Jain and A. Vailaya, "Shape-based retrieval: A case study with trademark 
image databases," Pattern Recognition, vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 1369 1390, 1998. 
S. Dudant, K. Breeding, and R. McGhee, "Aircraft identification by moment invari- 
ants," IEEE Trans. on Computers, vol. 0-26, pp. 3945, Jan 1977. 
M. R. Naphade and T. S. Huang, "A probabilistic framework for semantic indexing 
and retrieval in video," to appear in IEEE International Conference on Multimedia 
and Expo, New York, NY, July 2000. http://www.ifp.uiuc.edu/-milind/cpapers.html 
M. R. Naphade and T. S. Huang, "Stochastic modeling of soundtrack for efficient 
segmentation and indexing of video," in SPIE IS Fj T Storage and Retrieval for 
Multimedia Databases, vol. 3972, Jan 2000, pp. 168 176. 
