Universality and individuality in a neural 
code 
Elad Schneidman ,2 Naama Brenner a Naftali Tishby ,a 
Rob R. de Ruyter van Steveninck 3 William Bialek 3 
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Center for Neural Computation and 
2Department of Neurobiology, Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91904, Israel 
aNEC Research Institute, 4 Independence Way, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA 
{elads, tishby} cs.huji. ac. il, { bialek, ruyter, naama} research. nj. nec. com 
Abstract 
The problem of neural coding is to understand how sequences of 
action potentials (spikes) are related to sensory stimuli, motor out- 
puts, or (ultimately) thoughts and intentions. One clear question 
is whether the same coding rules are used by different neurons, or 
by corresponding neurons in different individuals. We present a 
quantitative formulation of this problem using ideas from informa- 
tion theory, and apply this approach to the analysis of experiments 
in the fly visual system. We find significant individual differences 
in the structure of the code, particularly in the way that tempo- 
ral patterns of spikes are used to convey information beyond that 
available from variations in spike rate. On the other hand, all the 
flies in our ensemble exhibit a high coding efficiency, so that every 
spike carries the same amount of information in all the individuals. 
Thus the neural code has a quantifiable mixture of individuality 
and universality. 
I Introduction 
When two people look at the same scene, do they see the same things? This basic 
question in the theory of knowledge seems to be beyond the scope of experimental 
investigation. An accessible version of this question is whether different observers of 
the same sense data have the same neural representation of these data: how much 
of the neural code is universal, and how much is individual? 
Differences in the neural codes of different individuals may arise from various 
sources: First, different individuals may use different 'vocabularies' of coding sym- 
bols. Second, they may use the same symbols to encode different stimulus features. 
Third, they may have different latencies, so they 'say' the same things at slightly 
different times. Finally, perhaps the most interesting possibility is that different 
individuals might encode different features of the stimulus, so that they 'talk about 
different things'. 
If we are to compare neural codes we must give a quantitative definition of similarity 
or divergence among neural responses. We shall use ideas from information theory 
[1, 2] to quantify the the notions of distinguishability, functional equivalence and 
content in the neural code. This approach does not require a metric either on the 
space of stimuli or on the space of neural responses (but see [3]); all notions of 
similarity emerge from the statistical structure of the neural responses. 
We apply these methods to analyze experiments on an identified motion sensitive 
neuron in the fly's visual system, the cell HI [4]. Many invertebrate nervous systems 
have cells that can be named and numbered [5]; in many cases, including the motion 
sensitive cells in the fly's lobula plate, a small number of neurons is involved in 
representing a similarly identifiable portion of the sensory world. It might seem 
that in these cases the question of whether different individuals share the same 
neural representation of the visual world would have a trivial answer. Far from 
trivial, we shall see that the neural code even for identified neurons in flies has 
components which are common among flies and significant components which are 
individual to each fly. 
2 Distinguishing flies according to their spike patterns 
Nine different flies are shown precisely the same movie, which is repeated many times 
for each fly (Figure la). As we show the movie we record the action potentials from 
the H1 neuron.  The details of the stimulus movie should not have a qualitative 
impact on the results, provided that the movie is sufficiently long and rich to drive 
the system through a reasonable and natural range of responses. Figure lb shows a 
portion of the responses of the different flies to the visual stimulus - the qualitative 
features of the neural response on long time scales (-- 100 ms) are common to almost 
all the flies, and some aspects of the response are reproducible on a (few) millisecond 
time scale across multiple presentations of the movie to each fly. Nonetheless the 
responses are not identical in the different flies, nor are they perfectly reproduced 
from trial to trial in the same fly. 
To analyze similarities and differences among the neural codes, we begin by dis- 
cretizing the neural response into time bins of size At = 2 ms. At this resolution 
there are almost never two spikes in a single bin, so we can think of the neural 
response as a binary string, as in Fig. lc-d. We examine the response in blocks or 
windows of time having length T, so that an individual neural response becomes 
a binary 'word' W with T/At 'letters'. Clearly, any fixed choice of T and At is 
arbitrary, and so we explore a range of these parameters. 
Figure If shows that different flies 'speak' with similar but distinct vocabularies. 
We quantify the divergence among vocabularies by asking how much information 
the observation of a single word W provides about the identity of its source, that 
is about the identity of the fly which generates this word: 
v pi (W) ] bits, (1) 
I(W --> identity; T) = y, Pi Y, pi(w)log2 pens(W ) 
i----1 147 - 
1The stimulus presented to the flies is a rigidly moving pattern of vertical bars, ran- 
domly dark or bright, with average intensity _ .. 100 mW/(m 2 ß st). The pattern position 
was defined by a pseudorandom sequence, simulating a diffusive motion or random walk. 
Recordings were made from the H1 neuron of immobilized flies, using standard methods. 
We draw attention to three points relevant for the present analysis: (1) The flies are freshly 
caught female Calliphora, so that our 'ensemble of flies' approaches a natural ensemble. 
(2) In each fly we identify the H1 cell as the unique spiking neuron in the lobula plate 
that has a combination of wide field sensitivity, inward directional selectivity for horizon- 
tal motion, and contralateral projection. (3) Recordings are rejected only if raw electrode 
signals are excessively noisy or unstable. 
a 
> -2oo 
b 
Fly 1 
Fly 2 
Fly 3 
Fly 4 
Fly 5 
Fly 6 
Fly 7 
Fly 8 
Fly 9 
3 
Stimulus 
Spike trains 
' c 
Fly 1 
e 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
o 0 
-0A 
0.2 
0.3 
d f 
Word distribution @ t 
pFly 1(Wit=3306) 
Fly 6 
..... >, 0.7 
-0.02 
0.04 
  0. 
3306 3318 
Time (ms) 
Total word distribution 
pFly 1 (W) 
pFly 6(W ) 
3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 20 40 60 
Time (s) binary word value 
Figure 1: Different flies' spike trains and word statistics. (a) All flies view the 
same random vertical bar pattern moving across their visual field with a time dependent 
velocity, part of which is shown. In the experiment, a 40 sec waveform is presented 
repeatedly, 90 times. (b) A set of 45 response traces to the part of the stimulus shown 
in (a) from each of the 9 flies. The traces are taken from the segment of the experiment 
where the transient responses have decayed. (c) Example of construction of the local word 
distributions. Zooming in on a segment of the repeated responses of fly 1 to the visual 
stimuli, the fiy's spike trains are divided into contiguous 2 ms bins, and the spikes in each 
of the bins are counted. For example, we get the 6 letter words that the fly used at time 
3306 ms into the input trace. (d) Similar as (c) for fly 6. (e) The distributions of words 
that flies i and 6 used at time t ---- 3306 ms from the beginning of the stimulus. The time 
dependent distributions, pi(wIt ---- 3306 ms) and p6(WIt ---- 3306 ms) are presented as 
function of the binary value of the actual 'word', e.g., binary word value '17' stands for 
the word '010001 . (f) Collecting the words that each of the flies used through all of the 
visual stimulus presentations, we get the total word distributions for flies i and 6, p1 
and P6 (W). 
where Pi = 1/N is the a priori probability that we are recording from fly i, Pi(w) 
is the probability that fly i will generate (at some time) the word W in response 
to the stimulus movie, and pens(w) is the probability that any fly in the whole 
ensemble of flies would generate this word, 
N 
pens (W) -- E Pi pi (W). 
i----1 
(2) 
The measure I(W - identity; T) has been discussed by Lin [11] as the 'Jensen- 
Shannon divergence' Djs among the distributions pi(w).2 
2Unlike the Kullback-Leibler divergence [2] (the 'standard' choice for measuring dissim- 
ilarity among distributions), the Jensen-Shannon divergence is symmetric, and bounded 
(see also [12]). Moreover, Djs can be used to bound other measures of similarity, such as 
the optimal or Bayesian probability of identifying correctly the origin of a sample. 
We find that information about identity is accumulating at more or less constant 
rate well before the undersampling limits of the experiment are reached (Fig. 2a). 
Thus I(W -- identity;T)  R(W -- identity). T; R(W -- identity)  5 bits/s, 
with a very weak dependence on the time resolution At. Since the mean spike rate 
can be measured by counting the number of Is in each word W, this information 
includes the differences in firing rate among the different flies. 
Even if flies use very similar vocabularies, they may differ substantially in the way 
that they associate words with particular stimulus features. Since we present the 
stimulus repeatedly to each fly, we can specify the stimulus precisely by noting the 
time relative to the beginning of the stimulus. We can therefore consider the word 
W that the i th fly will generate at time t. This word is drawn from the distribution 
pi(wIt ) which we can sample, as in Fig. lc-e, by looking across multiple presen- 
tations of the same stimulus movie. In parallel with the discussion above, we can 
measure the information that the word W observed at known t gives us about the 
identity of the fly, 
N [ P(Wlt) (3) 
I(W --> identitylt; T) = y Pi Y pi(Wlt)log2 pens(Wit ) , 
i=l W 
where the distribution of words used at time t by the whole ensemble of flies is 
N 
pens(wit ) = y pipi(wlt) ß 
(4) 
i=l 
The natural quantity is an average over all times t, 
I({W,t) --> identity;T)= {I(W --> identitylt; T)}t bits, (5) 
where {.. 'It denotes an average over t. 
Figure 2b shows a plot of I({W, t} - identity; T)/T as a function of the observation 
time window of size T. Observing both the spike train and the stimulus together 
provides 32 q- 1 bits/s about the identity of the fly. This is more than six times as 
much information as we can gain by observing the spike train alone, and corresponds 
to gaining one bit in - 30 ms; correspondingly, a typical pair of flies in our ensemble 
can be distinguished reliably in - 30 ms. This is the time scale on which flies actually 
use their estimates of visual motion to guide their flight during chasing behavior 
[6], so that the neural codes of different individuals are distinguishable on the time 
scales relevant to behavior. 
3 
Different flies encode different amounts of information 
about the same stimulus 
Having seen that we can distinguish reliably among individual flies using relatively 
short samples of the neural response, we turn to ask whether these substantial 
differences among codes have an impact on the ability of these cells to convey 
information about the visual stimulus. As discussed in Refs. [7, 8], the information 
which the neural response of the i th fly provides about the stimulus, I(W - s(t); T), 
is determined by the same probability distributions defined above: a 
Ii(W --> s(t);T)= ypi(wlt)log 2 pi(w ) . (6) 
w t 
aAgain we note that our estimate of the information rate itself is independent of any 
metric in the space of stimuli, nor does it depend on assumptions about which stimulus 
features are most important in the code. 
a b 
0.05 
E 
-0.03 
0.02 
o 
' O.Ol 
Fly 6 vs mxture 
, , Fly 1 ys mxturff 
0 15 20 25 30 
Word length (msec) 
Fly 6 vsmxture 
Fly 1 vs mxture 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 
Word length (msec) 
Figure 2: Distinguishing one fly from others based on spike trains. (a) The 
average rate of information gained about the identity of a fly from its word distribution, 
as a function of the word size used (middle curve). The information rate is saturated 
even before we reach the maximal word length used. Also shown is the average rate of 
information that the word distribution of fly 1 (and 6) gives about its identity, compared 
with the word distribution mixture of all of the flies. The connecting line is used for 
clarification only. (b) Similar to (a), we compute the average amount of information that 
the distribution of words the fly used at a specific point in time gives about its identity. 
Averaging over all times, we show the amount of information gained about the identity of 
fly 1 (and 6) based on its time dependent word distributions, and the average over the 9 
dies (middle curve). Error bars were calculated as in [8]. A "baseline calculation", where 
we subdivided the spike trains of one fly into artificial new individuals, and compared their 
spike trains, gave significantly smaller values (not shown). 
Figure 3a shows that the flies in our ensemble span a range of information rates 
from  50 to  150bits/s. This threefold range of information rates is correlated 
with the range of spike rates, so that each of the cells transmits nearly a constant 
amount of information per spike, 2.39 -4- 0.24 bits/spike. This universal efficiency 
(10% variance over the population, despite three fold variations in total spike rate), 
reflects that cells with higher firing rates are not generating extra spikes at random, 
but rather each extra spike is equally informative about the stimulus. 
Although information rates are correlated with spike rates, this does not mean 
that information is carried by a "rate code" alone. To address the rate/timing 
distinction we compare the total information rate in Fig. 3a, which includes the 
detailed structure of the spike train, with the information carried in the temporal 
modulations of the spike rate. As explained in Ref. [10], the information carried by 
the arrival time of a single spike can be written as an integral over the time variations 
of the spike rate, and multiplying by the number of spikes gives us the expected 
information rate if spikes contribute independently; information rates larger than 
this represent synergy among spikes, or extra information in the temporal patterns 
of spike. For all the flies in our ensemble, the total rate at which the spike train 
carries information is substantially larger than the 'single spike' information--2.39 
vs. 1.64 bits/spike, on average. This extra information is carried in the temporal 
patterns of spikes (Fig. 3b). 
4 A universal codebook? 
Even though flies differ in the structures of their neural responses, distinguishable 
responses could be functionally equivalent. Thus it might be that all flies could be 
150 
IO0 
50 
0 
0 
a 
lO0 
8O 
60 
b 
40 
2O 
0 
20 40 60 0 20 40 60 
Firing rate (spikes/sec) Firing rate (spikes/sec) 
Figure 3: The information about the stimulus that a fly's spike train carries 
is correlated with firing rate, and yet a significant part is in the temporal 
structure. (a) The rate at the H1 spike train provides information about the visual 
stimulus is shown as a function of the average spike rate, with each fly providing a single 
data point The linear fit of the data points for the 9 flies corresponds to a universal rate 
of 2.39 q- 0.24 bits/spike, as noted in the text. (b) The extra amount of information that 
the temporal structure of the spike train of each of the flies carry about the stimulus, 
as a function of the average firing rate of the fly (see [10]). The average amount of 
additional information that is carried by the temporal structure of the spike trains, over 
the population is 45 q- 17%. Error bars were calculated as in [8] 
endowed (genetically?) with a universal or consensus codebook that allows each 
individual to make sense of her own spike trains, despite the differences from her 
conspecifics. Thus we want to ask how much information we lose if the identity of 
the flies is hidden from us, or equivalently how much each fly can gain by knowing 
its own individual code. 
If we observe the response of a neuron but don't know the identity of the individual 
generating this response, then we are observing responses drawn from the ensemble 
distributions defined above, pens(wit ) and pens(w). The information that words 
provide about the visual stimulus then is 
Imix(w -- 8(t); T)- y pens(wit ) log 2 [ pens(W ) bits. (7) 
w t 
On the other hand, if we know the identity of the fly to be i, we gain the information 
that its spike train conveys about the stimulus, Ii(W -4 s(t);T), Eq. (6). The 
average information loss is then 
N 
I,aVg(W -4 s(t)' T) = y Pili(W -4 s(t)' T)- Imix(w -- 8(t); T). (8) 
oss   
i----1 
After some algebra it can be shown that this average information loss is related to 
the information that the neural responses give about the identity of the individuals, 
as defined above: 
I]aVg(W -4 s(t)' T) 
oss  
= I({W,t}-4 identity;T) 
-I(W -4 identity; T). 
(9) 
The result is that, on average, not knowing the identity of the fly limits us to 
extracting only 64 bits/s of information about the visual stimulus. This should be 
compared with the average information rate of 92.3 bits/s in our ensemble of flies: 
knowing her own identity allows the average fly to extract 44% more information 
from H1. Further analysis shows that each individual fly gains approximately the 
same relative amount of information from knowing its personal codebook. 
5 Discussion 
We have found that the flies use similar yet distinct set of 'words' to encode informa- 
tion about the stimulus. The main source of this difference is not in the total set of 
words (or spike rates) but rather in how (i.e. when) these words are used to encode 
the stimulus; taking this into account the flies are discriminable on time scales of 
relevance to behavior. Using their different codes, the flies' H1 spike trains convey 
very different amounts of information from the same visual inputs. Nonetheless, all 
the flies achieve a high and constant efficiency in their encoding of this information, 
and the temporal structure of their spike trains adds nearly 50% more information 
than that carried by the rate. 
So how much is universal and how much is individual? We find that each individual 
fly would lose -- 30% of the visual information carried by this neuron if it 'knew' only 
the codebook appropriate to the whole ensemble of flies. We leave the judgment 
of whether this is high individuality or not to the reader, but recall that this is 
the individuality in an identified neuron. Hence, we should expect that all neural 
circuits--both vertebrate and invertebrate--express a degree of universality and a 
degree of individuality. We hope that the methods introduced here will help to 
explore this issue of individuality more generally. 
This research was supported by a grant from the Ministry of Science, Israel. 
References 
[1] Shannon, C. E. A mathematical theory of communication, Bell Sys. Tech. J. 27, 
379-423, 623-656 (1948). 
[2] Cover, T. & Thomas J. Elements of information theory (Wiley, 1991). 
[3] Victor, J. D. & Purpura, K. Nature and precision of temporal coding in visual cortex: 
a metric-space analysis, J. Neurophysiol. 76, 1310-1326 (1996). 
[4] Hausen, K. The lobular complex of the fly, in Photoreception and vision in inverte- 
brates (ed All, M.) pp. 523-559 (Plenum, 1984). 
[5] Bullock, T. Structure and Function in the Nervous Systems of Invertebrates (W. H. 
Freeman, San Francisco, 1965). 
[6] Land, M. F. & Collett, T. S. Chasing behavior of houseflies (Fannia canicularis). A 
description and analysis, J. Comp. Physiol. 89, 331-357 (1974). 
[7] de Ruyter van Steveninck, R. R., Lewen, G. D., Strong, S. P., Koberle, R. & W. Bialek, 
Reproducibility and variability in neural spike trains, Science 275 1805-1808, (1997). 
[8] Strong, S. P., Koberle, R., de Ruyter van Steveninck, R. & Bialek, W. Entropy and 
information in neural spike trains, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 197-200 (1998). 
[9] Rieke, F., Warland, D., de Ruyter van Steveninck, R. & Bialek, W. Spikes: Exploring 
the Neural Code (MIT Press, 1997). 
[10] Brenner, N., Strong, S. P., Koberle, R., de Ruyter van Steveninck, R. & Bialek, W. 
Synergy in a neural code, Neural Comp. 12 1531-52 (2000). 
[11] Lin, J., Divergence measures based on the Shannon entropy, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 
37, 145-151 (1991). 
[12] E1-Yaniv, R., Fine, S. & Tishby, N. Agnostic classification of Markovian sequences, 
NIPS 10 pp. 465-471 (MIT Press, 1997). 
